---
layout: post
title: "How will ChatGPT Affect Our Teaching and Learning?"
date: 2023-02-06 
---

*In this post, I first talk about some imminent challenges ChatGPT has imposed on our current post-secondary education systems in universities and colleges, and then discuss some far-reaching impacts implied by ChatGPT on the ways of how we will learn online in general.*
<br><br>

Being such a revolutionary IT product, I am strongly convinced that *ChatGPT* will eventually be used by billion of users on a daily basis and it will fundamentally change many aspects in our daily lives, such as the ways we live, work, learn and teach, etc. In this follow-up blog post (after my last post - [What is ChatGPT](https://incml.github.io/2023/01/28/What-Is-ChatGPT.html)), I will first talk about *ChatGPT's* imminent impacts on the way we currently teach in universities and colleges. After that,  I will generally discuss other influences that *ChatGPT* will soon impose on how we all will learn in our daily lives.

First of all, as a professor working in a university for over 20 years, I would like to use my personal experiences as an early user of *ChatGPT* to explain what threats we are facing as teachers in universities or colleges and why these threats are imminent and real.  Right after *ChatGPT* was launched in December 2022, I tested *ChatGPT* by submitting many questions used in my assignments or exams from many courses I have taught in a computer science department, including programming, operating systems, machine learning, advanced linear algebra. I deliberately chose those hard questions that were not borrowed from anywhere else. I am confident that these questions were entirely created by myself from scratch and I have never released these questions anywhere in the Internet so that it is very unlikely that the current version of *ChatGPT* has used these questions in its training stage. What really shocked me was that *ChatGPT* has successfully answered all of these questions. Sometimes it produced ‘B/B+’-level answers but it could easily produce ‘A+’ answers without more than three trials. *ChatGPT* can not only produce correct answers to all questions but also come up with clear and logical explanations. To be honest, I probably have not seen such excellent answers more than a few occasions from my students during my entire 20 years of teaching career. I have to admit that in many cases the answers generated by *ChatGPT* can easily beat my own reference solutions in terms of clarity and overall quality. Based on my experiences with *ChatGPT*, I have a good feeling that *ChatGPT* should be able to perfectly or sufficiently accurately answer almost all exam/assignment questions normally given to students in most university or college courses in mathematics, natural science, computer science and engineering.

The capabilities of *ChatGPT* do not stop here. *ChatGPT* can also be used to generate business reports in business courses, essays in liberal arts or social science courses. It is amazing that *ChatGPT* can generate such fluent and logical text documents that cannot be easily distinguished from what ordinary persons or even professionals have written. Most of time, these raw reports and essays generated by *ChatGPT* (without re-editing by human) are not  outstanding but they should be good enough to be marked by most instructors at least around *B/B+* levels. Even worse, due to the probabilistic nature of *ChatGPT's* text generation mechanism,  *ChatGPT* can produce vastly different answers in different trials even for the same query. Sometimes these answers generated under the same prompt may differ semantically in meaning while other times they are just different wordings to rephrase the same meaning. Usually all these answers are equally fluent and acceptable to a human reader. This does not include the cases where the query itself can be slightly tweaked to force *ChatGPT* to produce even more diversified or more specific outputs. These factors impose a huge challenge on effective detection of academic plagiarism in almost all open-book assignments and projects in schools. This issue is widespread in almost all university or college courses, equally affecting pretty much all academic programs, including mathematics, science, engineering, social science, liberal arts, business, medicine, etc.  

There are some heated discussions in social media regarding how to deal with potential academic plagiarism caused by *ChatGPD* in universities/colleges. Some people have proposed that we should revise all assignments and projects to ensure that they are significantly harder or more challenging than what *ChatGPT* can do. I seriously doubt  this strategy could be feasible in practice. We should not underestimate what *ChatGPD* can already achieve at the moment. *ChatGPT* has demonstrated an amazing level of smartness and versatility so that I do not think it is easy for anyone to come up any questions that are reasonable to students but hard for *ChatGPT*. Even though such questions were luckily found, they would soon become part of *ChatGPT's* training data as long as any student submitted  it to query *ChatGPT*. It is very likely that *ChatGPT* would be able to answer it correctly in its future versions. Even in the past two months, I have noticed that *ChatGPT* has been evolving and making steady progresses. In December 2022, I asked *ChatGPT* to prove the statement that  *"every even natural number greater than 2 is the sum of two prime numbers"*, it generated a long paragraph full of mathematic notations and equations, appearing to be a mathematical proof. I did not bother to read it closely since I know it cannot be a legitimate proof anyway. However, when I asked *ChatGPT* the same question about 1-2 months after the initial trial, instead of making up some fake proofs, it just says that this statement is the well-known Goldbach's conjecture and it is one of the oldest and best-known unsolved problems in number theory. 

Another proposed idea is that we do not count any open-book works by students in our courses but solely rely on the closed exams for course evaluation. I do not think this is an ideal solution in universities given the subjects and topics are relatively advanced. The scope and depth of questions that can be given to students in any exam of several hours are quite limited. This type of evaluation will probably encourage rote memorization rather than meaningful learning. 

The third proposal is that we, as educators, should welcome *ChatGPT* instead of banning or limiting it in any way. We should teach students to use *ChatGPD* for their works and allow students to make good uses of *ChatGPT* in their assignments or projects. I think the skills we need to compose some quick prompts or questions to ask *ChatGPT* to generate any good answer are totally different from the skills we need to understand the content and write an answer ourselves. This is just like the difference between teaching how to use a calculator versus how to calculate 10-digit multiplication on one’s own. In my opinion, teaching how to use *ChatGPT* is probably just a crash course and it definitely does not worth 4-year higher education. Someone may further argue that we do not need to know those contents anymore because a machine can produce them pretty cheaply, just like we do not need to master mental calculation once cheap calculators have become available. I think it is quite risky to take this argument at the moment because *ChatGPT* is not the same as a calculator or any other learning tools. *ChatGPT* knows almost entire knowledge base of humanity and it already can answer most questions better than a majority of people in population. Does this mean that our younger generations will not need to learn or know anything themselves as long as they know how to ask *ChatGPT* to produce good answers, which they probably can not understand themselves?  This doesn’t sound right to me!!!

No matter what position we may take in the arguments, we have to admit that *ChatGPT*, along with other technology advances in recent years, have imposed some serious threats on our current education systems. It is the time for all of us, as educators, to confront these issues and work collectively to adapt our traditional education systems into a new age that is so much dominated by technologies. 

Not just inside schools, the Internet has become a ubiquitous learning tool for all of us to look for all sorts of information on pretty any topics or learn new knowledge in almost any subjects or disciplines. Beyond doubt, Google search is playing an indispensable role in online learning. Google helps us to quickly locate the most relevant Web pages from a simple query consisting of key words or phrases. We normally have to read through some suggested pages ourselves to find out the information we are interested in. Only for some common queries, Google can directly provide a short answer or display a short summary literally excerpted from one relevant page. Even though we have become accustomed to this type of interactions with Google for many years, *ChatGPT* can clearly offer better experiences in several aspects. First of all, we can ask *ChatGPT* using natural language in the exactly same way as we communicate with people. This makes *ChatGPT* look much smarter than Google and *ChatGPT* definitely provides a better or more natural way for people to communicate with computers, especially for ordinary people unsavvy of technology. Second, *ChatGPT* can reply to any query with a coherent summary written in natural language. As a result, we do not need to read through many long web pages ourselves but just read a single paragraph for what we are looking for. It is quite impressive  that *ChatGPT* is always capable of composing fluent and coherent text in natural language that can not be easily distinguished from what are written by humans. Unlike that Google just simply excerpts a paragraph from one relevant page, *ChatGPT* can use its own words to compose new texts to directly address our questions. For complex questions, *ChatGPT* can provide much better experiences than Google's excerpts.  Even though *ChatGPT* occasionally may say something untrue,  it is amazing that *ChatGPT* seemingly can already answer most questions correctly in a clear-cut way. 
For most factual questions from any disciplines, either humanities, mathematics, science, engineering or medicine, *ChatGPT* can already produce precise answers with a good accuracy not inferior to any human teacher. Of course, there is still a significant gap to close before *ChatGPT* can answer *all* questions perfectly on a par with dictionaries and textbooks. I have no doubt that these problems will be gradually solved in future generations of *ChatGPT*. Even for now, I agree that *ChatGPT* has imposed a real threat to Google's search engine and the business model behind it. I am sure Google will fight back and it is really interesting to see how this battle will eventually unfold in coming years. No matter what, it will significantly change the ways we search the information and learn new knowledge in the future. 

Over the past decades, a countless number of people, including many experts and professionals in various areas, have contributed to the rich and high-quality content freely available in the Internet. A large portion of the online content exists as text, which also became the nutrition to fuel *ChatGPT* at the first place. Until now, these text documents have mostly been written by human and gradually accumulated over the past decades. It often takes days or even weeks for a journalist to write a full journal article and at least several minutes for a user to write a product review. However, *ChatGPT* can generate an article of the same length in less than a second and produce thousand or million of reviews in seconds. To most readers, text documents produced by *ChatGPT* do not look different from those articles written by humans. As *ChatGPT* continuously improve its performance, it may be really hard, if not impossible, to invent reliable technology to precisely detect what is written by *ChatGPT* rather than humans.
It is well expected that more and more computer-generated text (as well as computer programs/codes) will be posted onto the Internet in the future. Given that *ChatGPT* can produce text so fast and so easily, it is expected that this portion of text content will explode quickly and it will very soon overshadow the human-written content to become the dominant part of online content. As a result, in near future, we will inevitably begin to unwittingly read machine-generated contents most times when surfing the Internet. It is hard to predict how this may affect our learning in a long run. Moreover, we can also imagine that future chatbots will learn over this even larger quantity of 'fake' text mostly produced by *ChatGPT*. It is unclear whether this self-fuelling feedback cycle will be able to continuously improve the intelligence level of chatbots. No matter what happens, we have to be prepared to read more and more text written by computers like *ChatGPT* , and very likely these texts will be customized for each individual person based on one's preferences, background and even biases since text generation by computers is such a cheap and fast process. 

At last, *I swear that this post is entirely written by me and ChatGPT is not used to compose any text in this post.*  Let's hope that I may still have some time to write more follow-up posts before *ChatGPT* can write better than me.  